---
layout: post
title: "covid-19"
author: "mike richman"
categories: current-events
tags: [visualization, mapping, covid19, population density]
---

The plague known as COVID-19, or "the coronavirus" (seemingly to obscure the
fact that it's [another
SARS](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-causes-it)),
is in the news continuously these days as it spreads throughout the world
wreaking havoc on individuals and societies.  For technical people, it's
tempting to try to jump in and find a way to save the day.

That is not what we will be doing in this post.  Instead, as an exercise in
maintaining some sense of control in the face of an existential threat, we're
going to make a bunch of plots that may be helpful in understanding what is
even happening right now.

**tl;dr:** COVID-19 continues to spread through the US at an alarming rate, and
while states are currently in the process of "opening up", there's little
evidence that we are ready to do so safely.


## dataset and code

Our main data source is [The COVID Tracking
Project](https://covidtracking.com/data), which maintains a fairly detailed
spreadsheet on US data.  We will also be using county-level population data
obtained from [this
mirror](http://www.decisionsciencenews.com/2017/06/26/weighted-population-density/)
of an [R-bloggers post](https://www.r-bloggers.com/weighted-population-density/) on
population-weighted density.  Analysis of global data is left as an exercise
for the reader and/or my future self.

The entire analysis is laid out, along with additional plots and light
commentary, in [this
notebook](https://github.com/zgana/data-science-one-offs/blob/master/covid19.ipynb)
— better viewed via [jupyter
nbviewer](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/zgana/data-science-one-offs/blob/master/covid19.ipynb).
I hope in future posts to go over the implementation in more detail, especially
for the interactive maps below which are non-trivial to construct in such a way
that they will update live in the browser without an active server running on
the backend.


## interactive maps

The following maps let you explore the viral spread over time.  Each one has a
slider in terms of days since January 22, the earliest date covered by the
dataset.  Mouse over different states to see totals to-date along with
population data.

The first two maps show cumulative death toll and cumulative positive cases.

{% include 2020-05-17/map_deaths.html %}
{% include 2020-05-17/map_positive_cases.html %}

The next two maps show weekly rolling sums for deaths and positive cases.

{% include 2020-05-17/map_weekly_deaths.html %}
{% include 2020-05-17/map_weekly_positive_cases.html %}

I think these maps are a simple way to get a feel for how things have played
out, but we're going to need some more detailed analysis to draw any useful
conclusions.


## trajectory by state

How did we get here?  One common way of portraying the trajectory of the virus
in different geographic regions is to pick a reference point such as "date when
death toll reached 100" as a per-region anchor for the date axis; then a large
number of regions can be summarized with a logarithmic vertical axis.  We start
with this approach, looking at deaths and positive cases.

![Top 10 States: Deaths and Positive Cases](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/deaths_positive_top10.png> "Top 10 States: Deaths and Positive Cases")

As has been widely reported, in addition to the mid-Atlantic region, there are
significant outbreaks in the Midwest, Southwest, and California.  The
logarithmic axis shows this clearly, but it also obscures the latest trends.
An alternative I haven't seen is to show the per-state cumulative percent death
toll.  This lets us compare many states at once without giving up detail on the
most recent data.

![Top 10 States: Cumulative Percent of Deaths and Positive Cases](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/deaths_positive_cumulative_top10.png> "Top 10 States: Cumulative Percent of Deaths and Positive Cases")

Here we see some substantial variation in number of positive tests, which may
be due to variable testing practices from state to state.  However, the trend
in death toll is clear: with the exception of New York, the death toll is still
rising approximately linear in most other states.

This analysis was inspired in part by [this
article](https://www.erinbromage.com/post/the-risks-know-them-avoid-them) by
Erin Bromage.  There she points out that while many hope to take comfort in
recent week-over-week decreases in death toll, in fact that effect is mostly
confined to New York.  This is made clear by switching to weekly (not
cumulative) numbers and explicitly breaking down New York vs the rest of the
US.

![New York vs the rest of US](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/deaths_positive_nyvs.png> "New York vs the rest of US")

Here are the weekly numbers for all states:

![Top 10 States: Weekly Deaths and Positive Cases](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/weekly_deaths_positive_top10.png> "Top 10 States: Weekly Deaths and Positive Cases")

It is worth noting that we are getting better about testing over time.  Here
we see that testing is on the rise, and the positive test rate is generally in
decline.

![Weekly Testing](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/weekly_testing.png> "Weekly Testing")

Some states are doing better than others, both in terms of testing and in
recent new cases, but my takeaway remains that it is *far too early* to be
"opening up".


## how did we get here?

Experts generally agree that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease
COVID-19, spreads through close contact between individuals.  Thus, it's worth
looking for a possible connection between population and viral spread.

In my first-pass analysis, I simply pulled total populations per state [from
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_states_and_territories_of_the_United_States_by_population).
However, it's easy to see why we should look at population density — we're
concerned specifically with large numbers of people in close proximity.  In
particular, _population-weighted density_, which has recently been [embraced by
the US
census](https://www.smartcitiesdive.com/ex/sustainablecitiescollective/census-bureau-embraces-weighted-density/69236/),
may be the most relevant metric because it captures the average experience of
individuals in a region.

We can estimate population-weighted density by working with county-level data
and aggregating up to the state level.  Because it gives more weight to
counties with higher population density, the population-weighted density per
state is larger than the traditional population density:

![Population-Weighted Density](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/pop_weighted_density.png> "Population-Weighted Density")

With this understanding in hand, we take a look at deaths and positive cases
versus population, population density, and population-weighted density.

![Deaths and Positive Cases vs Population](</assets/img/blog/2020-05-17/deaths_positive_pop.png> "Deaths and Positive Cases vs Population")

Here we see that the strength of the correlation increases from population to
population density, and again from traditional population density to
population-weighted density.


## conclusions for now

I haven't seen this population-weighted density finding elsewhere, though I
doubt I'm the first to see it.  My gut feeling is that this is scary news.
There are "natural experiments" playing out as states take varied approaches to
pandemic harm reduction.  Are we largely helpless, tweaking things at the
margins while the underlying structure of our communities determines our fate?

That is, however, a myopic take.  I haven't yet examined global data in this
level of detail, but we've heard that some countries such as [South
Korea](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/23/world/asia/coronavirus-south-korea-flatten-curve.html)
have fared far better despite very high population density.

We aren't doomed — not by nature, anyway.  What we need is a response from
leadership that is commensurate with the threat, or, failing that, to take
responsibility for ourselves and our communities and do everything we can to
keep each other safe.

Stay home if you can; wear a mask when you need to go out.  Keep your distance
from your neighbors like your and their lives depend on it — because they do.
